Lab Tips: Centre for Biological Control
================
Clarke van Steenderen
14/10/2020

## Pipettes

When you are finished using pipettes for the day, set them back to their
highest volume (e.g. set a 200 uL pipette up to 200 uL). This preserves
the springs inside and will keep them calibrated for longer. Always
store them vertically.

## Preparing primers

Once your primers arrive, you need to spin them down in the
microcentrifuge (just in case the dried pellet stuck to the lid or the
side of the tube), add the specified amount of deionised water to them
(this will be provided in the information sheet that comes with the
primer/s), and mix well by flicking the tube. These are now at a 100 uM
concentration, and are referred to as the ‘master stock solutions’. Store
them in the freezer.

To make working solutions for your PCRs, you need to create working
solutions at a concentration of 10 uM. To do this, mix 90 uL deionised
water with 10 uL of the master stock solution to make up a final volume
of 100 uL.

**C1V1 = C2V2**  
(100 uM)(V1) = (10 uM)(100 uL)  
v1 = 10 uL master stock solution in 90 uL water

Store these working solutions in the freezer. When you are about to use
them to set up PCR reactions, be sure to mix them well, as settling
could have occurred, and then you have more water at the surface, and
highly concentrated primer at the bottom of the tube.

## Nano-dropping

Be sure to run a blank before starting, by using 2 uL of the solution
that you eluted your extraction in (for example AE buffer (salt
extraction), or genomic elution buffer (kit)). Clean the pedestal
between each sample, and use 1 - 2 uL for each reading.

## Diluting DNA extracts

Sometimes you’ll have samples with a really high DNA concentration (for
example 300 ng/uL or more). Diluting it down is often a good idea for
PCR, so that you have about 100 ng in your final PCR volume. Taking the
300 ng/uL example, if you want to dilute this down to 50 ng/uL in a
final volume of 100 uL, you would use the C1V1 = C2V2 formula again:

(300 ng/uL)(V1) = (50 ng/uL)(100 uL)  
V1 = \~17 uL DNA in 83 uL deionised water.

:bulb: Adding 2 uL of this diluted DNA to a PCR tube means that you have
a total quantity of 100 ng DNA.

## Diluting TBE buffer

To make a 1X buffer solution, mix TBE buffer and deionised water in a
ratio of 1:9, respectively. For example, to make a 1 L solution, mix 100
mL TBE buffer (10X solution) with 900 mL water.

## Diluting ethidium bromide

As with the primer dilution, mix 10 uL concentrated ethidium bromide
with 90 uL water. Always wear gloves and a lab coat when handling this
chemical.

## Preparing agarose gels

To make a standard 1% agarose gel for a small gel tank, mix 100 mL 1X
TBE buffer with 1 g agarose powder in a glass bottle. Heat this in the
microwave until it begins to boil. Keep swirling periodically. Be very
careful, as this is extremely hot (use the thick gloves to handle the
bottle)\! Once this is done, add 10 uL ethidium bromide (diluted EtBr),
mix well, and leave to cool for a few minutes (but not long enough for
it to set yet\!). Position the combs in the gel mould, and then pour the
agarose solution into it. Leave to cool for about 20 - 30 minutes.

## Loading a gel

For each PCR sample, dispense 2 uL loading dye into a sample tray, or
even onto a piece of parafilm. Mix 5 uL of the PCR sample in with the
dye. Add 2 - 4 uL ladder into the first well in the gel (if you have two
combs, put ladder into the first well in the second row as well). Now
load up the 7 uL sample (2 uL loading dye + 5 uL PCR product) into each
well. Connect the gel dock to the powerpack battery, and set it to 90
Volts for 40 minutes. Make sure that the gel is positioned such that the
wells are at the negative end, and can migrate to the positive end of
the gel tray.
